Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools
TimoSchick JaneDwivedi-Yu RobertoDessì† RobertaRaileanu
MariaLomeli LukeZettlemoyer NicolaCancedda ThomasScialom
MetaAIResearch †UniversitatPompeuFabra
Abstract
The New England Journal of Medicine is a registered
trademark of [QA(“Who is the publisher of The New
Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable
England Journal of Medicine?”) → Massachusetts
abilities to solve new tasks from just a few
Medical Society] the MMS.
examples or textual instructions, especially at
scale. They also, paradoxically, struggle with
basic functionality, such as arithmetic or fac- Out of 1400 participants, 400 (or [Calculator(400 / 1400)
tual lookup, where much simpler and smaller → 0.29] 29%) passed the test.
models excel. In this paper, we show that
LMscanteachthemselvestouseexternaltools The name derives from “la tortuga”, the Spanish word for
via simple APIs and achieve the best of both [MT(“tortuga”) → turtle] turtle.
worlds. We introduce Toolformer, a model
trained to decide which APIs to call, when to
The Brown Act is California’s law [WikiSearch(“Brown
callthem,whatargumentstopass,andhowto
Act”) → The Ralph M. Brown Act is an act of the
best incorporate the results into future token
California State Legislature that guarantees the public's
prediction. This is done in a self-supervised
right to attend and participate in meetings of local
way,requiringnothingmorethanahandfulof
legislative bodies.] that requires legislative bodies, like
demonstrations for each API. We incorporate
city councils, to hold their meetings open to the public. arangeoftools,includingacalculator,aQ&A
system, a search engine, a translation system,
and a calendar. Toolformer achieves substan- Figure 1: Exemplary predictions of Toolformer. The
tially improved zero-shot performance across model autonomously decides to call different APIs
a variety of downstream tasks, often competi- (from top to bottom: a question answering system,
tivewithmuchlargermodels,withoutsacrific- a calculator, a machine translation system, and a
ingitscorelanguagemodelingabilities. Wikipediasearch engine)to obtaininformationthat is
usefulforcompletingapieceoftext.
1 Introduction
Large language models achieve impressive zero- Asimplewaytoovercometheselimitationsof
and few-shot results on a variety of natural lan- today’s language models is to give them the abil-
guageprocessingtasks(Brownetal.,2020;Chowd- ity to use external tools such as search engines,
heryetal.,2022,i.a.) andshowseveralemergent calculators, or calendars. However, existing ap-
capabilities (Wei et al., 2022). However, all of proaches either rely on large amounts of human
thesemodelshaveseveralinherentlimitationsthat annotations(Komeilietal.,2022;Thoppilanetal.,
can at best be partially addressed by further scal- 2022)orlimittoolusetotask-specificsettingsonly
ing. Theselimitationsincludeaninabilitytoaccess (e.g.,Gaoetal.,2022;Parisietal.,2022),hinder-
up-to-dateinformationonrecentevents(Komeili ingamorewidespreadadoptionoftooluseinLMs.
etal.,2022)andtherelatedtendencytohallucinate Therefore, we propose Toolformer, a model that
facts(Maynezetal.,2020;Jietal.,2022),difficul- learnstousetoolsinanovelway,whichfulfillsthe
tiesinunderstandinglow-resourcelanguages(Lin followingdesiderata:
et al., 2021), a lack of mathematical skills to per-
formprecisecalculations(Pateletal.,2021)andan • The use of tools should be learned in a
unawarenessoftheprogressionoftime(Dhingra self-supervised way without requiring large
etal.,2022). amountsofhumanannotations. Thisisimpor-
3202
beF
9
]LC.sc[
1v16740.2032:viXra
1 2 3 LM Dataset
LM Dataset
Sample API Calls Execute API Calls Filter API Calls with API Calls
x
1:i-1
= Pittsburgh is c
i
1 = What other name is r
i
1 = Steel City L
i
(c
i
1 → Steel City) x* = Pittsburgh is
also known as Pittsburgh known by? < min(L(c1 → ε), L(ε)) also known as
i i i
[QA(What …?
x i:n = the Steel City c i 2 = Which country is r i 2 = United States L i (c i 2 → United States) → Steel City)]
Pittsburgh in? > min(L(c2 → ε), L(ε)) the Steel City.
i i i
Figure 2: Key steps in our approach, illustrated for a question answering tool: Given an input text x, we first
sample a position i and corresponding API call candidates c1,c2,...,ck. We then execute these API calls and
i i i
filter out all calls which do not reduce the loss L over the next tokens. All remaining API calls are interleaved
i
withtheoriginaltext,resultinginanewtextx∗.
tantnotonlybecauseofthecostsassociated severalotherbaselinesonvarioustasks.
withsuchannotations,butalsobecausewhat
2 Approach
humans find useful may be different from
whatamodelfindsuseful.
OuraimistoequipalanguagemodelM withthe
abilitytousedifferenttoolsbymeansofAPIcalls.
• TheLMshouldnotloseanyofitsgenerality
We require that inputs and outputs for each API
and should be able to decide for itself when
canberepresentedastextsequences. Thisallows
and how to use which tool. In contrast to
seamlessinsertionofAPIcallsintoanygiventext,
existingapproaches,thisenablesamuchmore
using special tokens to mark the start and end of
comprehensiveuseoftoolsthatisnottiedto
eachsuchcall.
specifictasks.
WerepresenteachAPIcallasatuplec = (a ,i )
c c
Ourapproachforachievingthesegoalsisbased wherea isthenameoftheAPIandi isthecor-
c c
on the recent idea of using large LMs with in- respondinginput. GivenanAPIcallcwithacor-
context learning(Brown etal., 2020)togenerate responding result r, we denote the linearized se-
entiredatasetsfromscratch(SchickandSchütze, quencesoftheAPIcallnotincludingandincluding
2021b;Honovichetal.,2022;Wangetal.,2022): itsresult,respectively,as:
Given just a handful of human-written examples
ofhowanAPIcanbeused,weletaLMannotate e(c) = <API>a c (i c )</API>
a huge language modeling dataset with potential e(c,r) = <API>a (i ) → r</API>
c c
API calls. We then use a self-supervised loss to
determine which of these API calls actually help where“<API>”,“</API>”and“→”arespecial
themodelinpredictingfuturetokens. Finally,we tokens.1 Some examples of linearized API calls
finetunetheLMitselfontheAPIcallsthatitcon- insertedintotextsequencesareshowninFigure1.
siders useful. As illustrated in Figure 1, through Given a dataset C = {x1,...,x|C|} of plain
thissimpleapproach,LMscanlearntocontrolava- texts, we first convert this dataset into a dataset
rietyoftools,andtochooseforthemselveswhich C∗ augmentedwithAPIcalls. Thisisdoneinthree
tooltousewhenandhow. steps,illustratedinFigure2: First,weexploitthe
As our approach is agnostic of the dataset be- in-contextlearningabilityofM tosamplealarge
ingused,wecanapplyittotheexactsamedataset number of potential API calls. We then execute
thatwasusedtopretrainamodelinthefirstplace. these API calls and finally check whether the ob-
This ensures that the model does not lose any tained responses are helpful for predicting future
of its generality and language modeling abilities. tokens; this is used as a filtering criterion. After
We conduct experiments on a variety of differ- filtering, we merge API calls for different tools,
ent downstream tasks, demonstrating that after
resultingintheaugmenteddatasetC∗,andfinetune
learning to use tools, Toolformer, which is based
1Inpractice,weusethetokensequences“ [”,“]”and
on a pretrained GPT-J model (Wang and Komat- “->” to represent “<API>”, “</API>” and “→”, respec-
suzaki,2021)with6.7Bparameters,achievesmuch tively.Thisenablesourapproachtoworkwithoutmodifying
theexistingLM’svocabulary.Forreasonsofreadability,we
strongerzero-shotresults,clearlyoutperforminga
stillrefertothemas“<API>”,“</API>”and“→”through-
muchlargerGPT-3model(Brownetal.,2020)and outthissection.